I'm Tom Turbiewill.
Captain Gerald Roup is a proud okey who has lived in the praises valley for the better
part of 38 years. A sound officer in World War II and what's a sound officer? There's
a good chance that like me you don't know about sound and flash, but you will find out
that his was not a large unit but quite a valuable one. That put itself deeply in harm's
way through combat at the Battle of the Bulge and other resistance in their march through
France and into Germany. Welcome, Captain Gerald Roup to Veterans of the Valley. You grew up
in Oklahoma. You are a proud okey. You Oklahoma class in 1942 and it didn't take long after
graduation that you were in the service in January of 43. I want to get right into what
is sound and flash, Captain Roup, because a lot of people might not be familiar with this
really a sort of survey operation of World War II. What sound in flash? Sound in flash,
Tom, is the common name given to a field artillery observation battalion. There are two
batteries, each made up of one sound platoon and one flash platoon. Just as the name implies,
sound actually the purpose of the unit is to locate enemy artillery. Sound basically
means that you put six microphones out about a mile apart over a five mile period area.
Then you connect these to a machine in the command post. We have an operator out front who
pushes a button when a shell goes over and it activates the machine and prints out on
tape the time that each microphone received the burst. Then since these are plotted by survey
on a plotting board, you can figure the difference in time that each shell hit the microphone and
back plot to locate the source of the sound or the gun. And if you get enough of these over
a period of time, then you'll know that you have a good plot and the information is given to
the core. We were core troops. And then they would fire and try to eliminate the gun.
Exactly. Basically that's it. This was really high tech for this time. I mean it sounds
high tech to me right now, but this was high tech for this time extremely wasn't. Very much so.
Of course it's pretty primitive now considering the way things are done. Now 1600 yards apart,
the reason for that because that had to do with the speed of sound between the microphones is
absolutely right. You put them four sound seconds apart and sound generally travels around 400
yards per second, depending on a lot of factors. But you spread on far enough that you could cover a
wide area, but they had to be as far forward as you could put them, which put the survey crews that
put in the mics in danger because they were quite out a lot of times in the open. And the OPs,
the outposts were up with the infantry outposts. So my command post had to of course be as far
forward as it could be because you had to run a line from each microphone back to the CP.
So it was a little bit of an arduous situation. Exactly. Now that was sound and that was your
specialty. That's out of sound. But explain what flash was. Alright. Flash is just as the word says,
you set up two optical instruments at a certain distance part. You measure the distance between them.
Generally in a church steeple or a high building or some place where they can see. And most of it was
done at night all of them. They could see flashes during the daytime. Both OPs would zero in on a
flash. And by trigonometry, since you knew the distance between the two and the angles,
you had the angle at the apex so you could locate the sources. Done. So all those students taking
trigonometry and wondering what are we taking this for? It certainly came in handy as far as
this particular operation in World War II. Exactly. Right. OPs of course that's your outpost, CP,
that's your command post. And I want to move on because you went on to a camp Gordon
Georgia and you started this new sound and flash unit in 1944. Went overseas in September of
1940. Let's talk about that because you landed at Omaha Beach. This was about three months after,
of course, D-Day. But sort of talk about what Omaha Beach in Normandy was like three months later.
Alright. Initially we landed at Liverpool. It took a train to Southampton and got on a boat
and went directly across the channel to Omaha Beach. There wasn't anything there except the
wrecked buildings, the concrete gun emplacements, the Germans that had. I think we all, I never
asked the Colonel why, but I think he wanted the honor of maybe landing on Omaha Beach. But we did.
Right. And I thought gee, they must need us pretty bad because here we are a week after we landed
back in France. Well, we sat there for six weeks waiting for our equipment to arrive. Right
there at the Sherborg Peninsula waiting for the equipment. So you sort of cooled your heels there
for a while, right? In the mud and the rain. Yes. Late October 1944 though you were in combat and
we're talking about the wintertime and we start talking about the battle of the bulge. The people I
have visited with that were involved in the battle of the bulge. The first thing they talk about
is the weather. The bitter, bitter cold. Talk about your memories of that. Well, the cold weather
really didn't start until about the time of the bulge. About the, it was 16th of December. Right.
Exactly. Right. But during that time we had moved, the army had moved up to the edge of Germany.
And of course everybody was optimistic. You know, we're going to be in Berlin by Christmas.
Well, it didn't work that way. The Germans and the weather turned out to be a key factor. So it
snowed and got cold and was miserable. It was the coldest winter of the century.
Right. Winter of 1944-45. Right. And we had problems with frostbite. Of course you lived out in
dugouts when we were in the Hurtken Forest, east of Aachen. So it was all in all, not a very pleasant
experience at that time. And your units during some of this time were taking resistance,
taking fire. And you were not a combat troop though. No. We were non-combat troops in the combat
zone. Exactly. I used to wonder why and it was never visited by some of the battalion people.
But they were smart enough to stay back where they were. But we got a lot of artillery incoming
during that period after the bulge and until actually around the first part of February when
they crossed the Royal River and moved on east. Right. But your job was to place these microphones
really out in front of the front. Exactly. So you were indeed in the front. This must have been a
rather harrowing ordeal from time to time. Well, it's the survey crews and the communications
people that really caught the brunt of it. Yes, sir. We lost a number of survey men and the
communications people, the wire man, had to replace the wire and the microphones because
GIs would see those mics and all they had warning signs on them. They knew telling what they
do to them. Right. You got orders to move on to the Elbriver, the Battle of the Bulge here,
early 1945. The bulge was actually over but your battalion was ordered to the Elbin. It was
something like a 200 mile march, is that right? This was after we had crossed the Rhine. Right.
About the middle of April. Thereabouts. Yes. Right. We were sitting after the battle of the
Ruhr or that so many hundred thousand Germans were captured. We figured the war was about over.
And we didn't have anything to do. We had a base out but there wasn't any ranging. So we figured
we were done, you know, sitting there fat, dumb and happy. Lots of German beer and good food.
Then we got orders to move to the Elbriver. Right. They pronounced it Elba, I think. I don't know why
we did but we did a 200 mile march in one day. We moved by batteries. Right. And during the march,
I was a little bit skeptical because the infantry had not moved nearly that far. They were still
involved in the Ruhr Valley. Right. Now about this time the Americans had met the Russians down
the town was a tow bar, a tow bar or something down below Magdeburg on the Elbriver. Right.
That was about the 25th of April. But we were fired. We ran on our march. We ran through several
groups of Germans and got fired on. In fact, they tore up one truck and killed the officer and
several enlisted men in the truck. And at that point I began to wonder why we were where we were.
Right. But we've been told to go. So when you're in the army you go where they tell you to. Right.
The Germans at this time were sort of in a mode of surrender. They felt that the war was coming
to an end. You didn't know exactly what the mode of the war was for the Russians. So you were all
sort of playing the game there finding out what the Russians were doing and you thought that
your movement to the Elbriver may have something to do with monitoring Russian artillery operations.
Right. When we got to the Elba about the 25th of April, the Germans had just started to surrender.
Elb at the Elba at that point is about 40 miles west of Berlin. And the Russians had just gotten
into Berlin and were devastating it. So the big march of Germans trying to surrender came out
after we got there to the Elb. So yeah, I think they put us there because they were a little
concerned that maybe the Russians said we had given orders. We'd been given orders not across the
Elb from Eisenhower. Right. So they were concerned that maybe the Russians would come into that
area and who knew what they would do. Right. So we were up there to range on Russian artillery in
case they began to move towards the Elb River. Right. There's a couple of stories that you told me
that I want to make sure that we tell. We may not be operating in the right order here. But talk about
the when you went and the train full of POWs that you sort of escorted back. That was a quite a sight that you'll
never forget. There were two there were three train cars I believe through full of German POWs.
This was while we were still at Sherberg, Brunenzela. They sent me and another officer in several
enlisted men up in Belgium to pick up a train load of German POWs. Right. And we ended up hauling
50 freight cars full of Germans 50 to a car back to the Sherberg area. So that was that was
something that you'll never forget and but they did get back they were prisoners but they did
get back. December the 16th you mentioned that date you also mentioned that that's sort of a special
date because in your mind three historical things happened on that date. They did. The first was
the battle of the ball started. Right. Second was General Eisenhower got his fifth star.
And third I was promoted to first lieutenant. All that happened on December the 16th. I wasn't on
the same orders with General Eisenhower obviously. You can find two of those three things in history
books right. Right. And your own history you remember that. There was an outcome to what you all
did is far from sound operation and the outcome I believe you said was some 65 enemy gun positions
were located so that was our initial location in the Hurtgen Forest. Right. Yes. Right. We were
there for about six weeks and during the winter the worst part of it and they told us later
corps did that we had located and they had gotten rid of some 65 German gun positions. Right.
Now I want to go ahead and fast forward back to the Elbriever because when you were here in
setting up your command post you were able to set up a command post that was a little bit more
luxurious than the command post that you had seen. It was a three story hunting lodge that belonged to
a German Baron sort of described this place and sort of the luxury of this place. It wasn't a
bad place to be and the Baron wasn't a bad guy. He was a nice fella. Yes sir. It was it was the
finest of any CP's we had the whole time. Right. He had been a Lieutenant Colonel in the German
Army. Very wounded. Very it's in place. It's in place. Right. And was wounded and retired.
His house in the Berlin had been destroyed so they had moved out to this three story hunting lodge.
Right. Which we have a picture of later. A lot later. Right. But as soon as it was about a half
a mile from the Elbriever and as soon as I saw it I told my master sergeant I said we're going
to end the war right here in luxury. So he and I went in and talked to the Colonel. He had his
family. He was there. He had three children I believe. Yes sir. And he was glad to see us really.
Right. We weren't the Russians. But he moved out to his sergeant quarters. Right. And gave us the
house. And so we stayed there until the war was over and we moved on back into the battalion area.
Before we go to the pictures of some of the artifacts from the war that you've got along with
you I want you to tell one more story when you were there. You were just sort of trying to
while away your time and you and your buck sergeant. A fellow named Dusty Roach decided to take
a little trip. Talk about what happened on that trip. Well I don't know whether I'm proud of it
or not but we did it. But Dusty and I were up at the river one day and Germans were coming across
and my my platoon was unhappy because they hadn't gotten any pistols and he looogers. Right. So I told
Dusty I said let's take one of these rubber boats these Germans coming across with and go on
across the river and see what we can find. So just as we got to the other side the river is about
50 yards wide there. A little car pulled up and four German officers got out and I said something
like are you through with your car and one of them said it sure is glad to hear English again.
He told me he'd been he was a doctor an MD from Brooklyn who had gone back to Germany
apparently early in the war and got stuck there and spent the whole time in the war. Right. Now
if that's that was his story I should have gotten his name but they were in a hurry to go on west.
Yes. So we got in the car turned it around and headed east and leisurely driving along it was
a nice day you know nothing happening nobody around and Dusty said Lieutenant we're not going
to learn to Berlin are we and I said I don't think so we driven maybe 10 or 15 minutes and about
that time here comes three great big German trucks enormous with steak bodies full of German soldiers
probably 50 in each truck just jammed in you know to get get away so I got out stopped car and
got out and held my hand up and said halt I said throw all of your weapons over here on the side
and go on up to the river and surrender and I guess we were the first GI's these fellas had seen
so not a peep out of any of them they threw through the guns over and belts and took off
so we hung the pistols on the belts and turned the car around and went back to the river
he said you got into some 175 pistols that that you got out of that so what do you think when you
got out of the out of your car and held held your hand up to these three trucks full I mean the war
was still going on oh I know it it worked out good didn't it I'm really I'm really not honored to
have been there but it was a dubious dubious distinction maybe that's right and you think that
because of that even though you didn't know whether you were supposed to been on the other side
of the river that quite possibly you and Sergeant Rhodes may have gotten the closest to Berlin of
anybody in the war on the ground on the ground yeah I did I didn't publicize what I had done
right because we had orders not to cross the L exactly but you weren't in a combat boat we weren't
attacking anybody right right right let's go to some photographs and then we've got some artifacts
here that you brought back from the war let's go to some few photographs that Captain Roup here
you are talk about you can look right over there on that monitor right there and you can tell us
about where are you there well that was somewhere in Germany Tom but I'm not sure it was where I
had a CP command post right and must been in the spring because I didn't have many heavy jackets on
exactly okay let's move on to the next photograph now here is the here's the hunting lodge that's
the Baron's hunting lodge and your command post I think you said what second floor the right three
windows well the command post was all the second floor all the second floor and that we it was
large enough that the whole platoon lived in there exactly lived in and the third floor was a big
ballroom yes sir that they had stored a lot of stuff in right no damage whatsoever it was
beautiful place probably built back in the middle 1800s and we've got a picture coming up of the
of the Baron there he is there's a Baron it's in place that's him wearing the uniform that
that we're gonna see we're gonna see this uniform we're gonna get a close-up of this this uniform
that you're seeing right here we have in the studio today and the hat and the belt everything but the
pants yes what happened to the pants they got laws and the boots as a matter of fact we have
those in the studio right okay quite a distinct talk about this I think people anybody that saw
the movie the longest day and remember the character that was played by red buttons I believe in
that movie will remember this scene this is actually what it looks like today I guess what was that
three years ago my two sons and I went back to France and spent a week on the Normandy Peninsula
and this church is in St. Mary Glees which is the nearest little town to Omaha Beach and it was
the first town that was gotten to by the GI's right this is an effigy that they keep hanging there
to commemorate the D-Day parachute drum right and that was depicted in that movie that's
well a part by red button so I believe just passed away this last year the actor did I believe
that's played part in that movie that's pretty fascinating okay let's move on I think we've got
a couple of others these are German POWs that are surrendering where is this one taking this
is at the Elbe where we where I had my CP close by right the bridge had been blown of course so
they they used rubber boats and anything they could find to get on across in a 10-day period there
they said that something like a million Germans surrendered right getting away from getting away
from the Russians okay I think we've got and here is your your unit and you are a middle sitting
in the middle center that's my sound platoon made up of the survey people and the the communications
people and the CP personnel right command both personnel one a very large unit that was the A
unit right that was A battery A battery the sound right yes right fascinating pictures and we have
some fascinating things we we talked about the uniform and as a matter of fact the uniform is
right here to the the side of you we're going to go ahead and take a closer look at that and sort
of describe what we're looking at this is the barren's uniform that how did it come by that he
just handed it over to you I think he was so glad to see us that we hadn't destroyed anything of his
and I think he also felt that he ultimately would end up in the Russians own right which he did
right because it had been partitioned but it hadn't been announced that this area he was in
would be in the right so maybe he just won't save it or see that somebody got it that would
treasure it right and right so that's briefly it that's obviously a piece of history that you have
that you that you treasure let's move on what I'm holding up here talk about this this helmet
and you can see right now that the detail the intricacy of what we're showing here this is talk
about this helmet and the barren gave you this right yes that's the spike helmet that German
officers wore up through and including World War One now I presume this had belonged to someone
in his family right because he had it and that's the old that was made the there's a
turn around so it says inside that was made in September of 199 wow that was the day of
manufacture wow that is incredible I've got to hold up a couple other things you just keep these
things in your home is that right I've given them all to my son I see but he keeps them yes yeah
I see I see you can take that off of the if you want to this what we're about to get a close-up
on here is a is a German Luger that here we go now this didn't come from the barren tell me how
you came by this that was on the on a German lieutenant colonel up on the Elb River one day
who was standing or directing his troops cross right and I didn't have a good Luger and I figured
that might be good so he gave it to me after I had asked him for it this is quite a quite a piece
how long were you overseas all together almost a year I'm going to reach over here and got some
other things this is a helmet another item that was given to you by the barren sort of we're
going to get a get focused in on this and here we go there's a close-up of the swastika on the
side of it and we will pan out talk about this helmet he gave this to you this belong to him I guess
I don't know but that's where it was yes people see these in in movies and documentaries about
World War II is find it incredible that that I'm actually holding one and on the other side there's
there's another insignia here I'm going to go ahead and move here into the shot and here if we have
another chance as I'm putting these up this is a I'm going to let you sort of describe this what
are what am I holding here it's an SS dress dagger the SS troops used them I don't have the
scabbard for it I don't never did but it was a part of a dress uniform right incredible and on
the I can't read the German but there is a you have you know what it says here on the blade I'm
not I'm not I'm not sure exactly I'll hand it over to you everything for Germany everything for
Germany I'll us fear Deutschland mm-hmm all for Germany right there's eagle on the on the handle has a
a small swastika there one other item that folks will definitely recognize this is I guess this
was given to you by the Baron this is a authentic Nazi arm band and the Baron gave you this
there right so this is the the one that he wore good be yeah wow
when you think about the war and you think about Hitler and and and what he stood for and what we
were fighting against and all that you look at these as just artifacts of of sort of the memory
of the victory of the allies and when you personally look at these things and look at what they
they represent and the other side what are sort of the thoughts that that come to mind as a
as a person who fought the war well now it's been so long I can do it dispassionately mm-hmm
but for a long time I was wrapped up in the emotions of the whole thing because it's an experience that
once you go through right and mine was not nearly as bad as a lot of people mm-hmm but because I
lived through it but yes sir it's something that that's with you absolutely absolutely
thank you very much for for for being with us for bringing these items it's just absolutely
incredible of course I know that you're very proud of of your family you have you have two sons
uh another son who who sadly passed away a few years ago you lost your wife Louise in 1998
but you have eight grandchildren then I know that you're very very proud of right and very
very proud in your retirement and I thank you very very much for being with us and mainly thank
you for your service captain route you're entirely welcome I appreciate it thank you
thank you and there were so many elements of world war too that if you were not familiar with sound
and flash and how it helped the allies win the war well now you know from a soldier who did his
dangerous duty and came home to tell the story we salute captain Gerald Rube and all veterans
I'm Tom Turbivill please join us next time on veterans of the valley
haha